feat: add `avro-turbo` format (#1197)
cloudevents/spec: cloudevents/formats/avro-turbo-format.md

# Avro Turbo Event Format for CloudEvents - Version 1.0.3-wip

## Abstract

The Avro Turbo Format for CloudEvents defines how events attributes are expressed in
the [Avro 1.9.0 Specification][avro-spec].

> This differs from the [Avro format](avro-formad.md) in that:

Reviewer: s/formad/format/

| Boolean       | [boolean][avro-primitives]                                             |
| Integer       | [int][avro-primitives]                                                 |
| String        | [string][avro-primitives]                                              |
| Binary        | [bytes][avro-primitives]                                               |
| URI           | [string][avro-primitives] following [RFC 3986 §4.3][rfc3986-section43] |
| URI-reference | [string][avro-primitives] following [RFC 3986 §4.1][rfc3986-section41] |
| Timestamp     | [long][avro-primitives]                                                |

Extension specifications MAY define secondary mapping rules for the values of
attributes they define, but MUST also include the previously defined primary
mapping.

### 2.3 OPTIONAL Attributes

CloudEvents Spec defines OPTIONAL attributes. The Avro format defines that these
fields MUST use the `null` type and the actual type through the
[union][avro-unions].

Example:

```json
["null", "string"]
```

### 2.4 Definition

Users of Avro MUST use a message whose binary encoding is identical to the one

> described by the [CloudEvent Avro Schema](cloudevents.avsc):

Reviewer: Not knowing Avro I don't know if this is silly question or not, but.... in the other avro-format.md file it points to an avsc file looks to be a copy of the json that's in the avro-format.md file. So, for Turbo, do we need a Turbo version of the avsc file?

Author: good point

```json
{
  "namespace": "io.cloudevents.v1.avro",
  "type": "record",
  "name": "CloudEvent",
  "version": "1.0",
  "doc": "Avro Turbo Event Format for CloudEvents",
  "fields": [
    {
      "name": "id",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "source",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "type",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "datacontenttype",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "dataschema",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "subject",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "time",
      "type": [
        "null",
        {
            "type": "long",
            "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
        }
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "attribute",
      "type": {
        "type": "map",
        "values": [
          "null",
          "boolean",
          "int",
          "string",

>           "bytes"

Author: this did not exist in the non-turbo version, but yes

        ]
      },
      "default": {}
    },
    {
      "name": "data",
      "type": [
        "bytes",
        "null"
      ],
      "default": "null"
    }
  ]
}
```

## 3 Data

Before encoding, the AVRO serializer MUST first determine the runtime data type
of the content. This can be determined by examining the data for invalid UTF-8
sequences or by consulting the `datacontenttype` attribute.

> If the implementation determines that the type of the data is binary, the value

Reviewer 2: Is this redundant since the definition only seems to allow 'bytes' (or null).

# Avro Turbo Event Format for CloudEvents - Version 1.0.3-wip

## Abstract

> The Avro Turbo Format for CloudEvents defines how events attributes are expressed in

Reviewer 3: I think this paragraph could do with rewriting - both here and in the original format - given that it's not just about attributes. It's how the whole event is represented in Avro, right? I'd also say it defines *one way* that CEs can be represented in Avro. Otherwise we've got two formats that say "This format defines how CEs are represented in Avro" and they can't both do that definitively.

Author: fixing

the [Avro 1.9.0 Specification][avro-spec].

This differs from the [Avro format](avro-format.md) in that:

- It is optimized for performance, preferring a more compact representation.

> - Only supports spec version 1.0 (any changes to spec version, requires 
>   changes to Avro schema, which changes the finger-print, 
>   breaking compatibility).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It only supports spec version 1.0 (any changes to spec version requires changes to the Avro schema,
  which changes the fingerprint, breaking compatibility).
```

> - Does not natively support JSON (JSON can be straight-forwardly serialized 
>   to bytes and this was therefore not considered neccessary).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It does not natively support JSON (JSON can be straight-forwardly serialized 
  to bytes and this was therefore not considered necessary).
```

Beyond the consistency/typo changes, it's not clear to me what "natively supporting JSON" means here. Perhaps describe what the original Avro format allows? (I assume this is related to `doc`, but I'm not sufficiently versed in Avro to really understand that in detail.)

Reviewer 3: Reading further, it feels like it's more than this - my possibly-hazy understanding is that the original format supports multiple data representations - *including* (but not limited to) JSON maps. (For example, I *think* you could just specify a string.) Whereas the Avro Turbo format requires that data is represented as a sequence of bytes - that's the only representation available. Is that a correct reading?

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#1-introduction)
2. [Attributes](#2-attributes)
3. [Data](#3-data)
4. [Transport](#4-transport)
5. [Examples](#5-examples)

## 1. Introduction

[CloudEvents][ce] is a standardized and protocol-agnostic definition of the

> structure and metadata description of events. This specification defines how the

Reviewer 3: Again, this needs to be less definitive if there are two alternative formats.

Author: fixing

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC2119][rfc2119].

## 2. Attributes

This section defines how CloudEvents attributes are mapped to the Avro
type-system. This specification explicitly maps each attribute.

### 2.1 Type System Mapping

The CloudEvents type system MUST be mapped to Avro types as follows.

| CloudEvents   | Avro                                                                   |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Boolean       | [boolean][avro-primitives]                                             |
| Integer       | [int][avro-primitives]                                                 |
| String        | [string][avro-primitives]                                              |
| Binary        | [bytes][avro-primitives]                                               |
| URI           | [string][avro-primitives] following [RFC 3986 §4.3][rfc3986-section43] |
| URI-reference | [string][avro-primitives] following [RFC 3986 §4.1][rfc3986-section41] |

> | Timestamp     | [long][avro-primitives]                                                |

Reviewer 3: I'd note here that this restricts the precision to milliseconds. (Assuming I've read things correctly later.) We also need to say somewhere that this is the number of milliseconds since 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z. (I'm okay with handwaving between UTC and TAI...)

Author: > The smallest time unit that RFC3339 can support is one nanosecond (1 ns).

Author: In practical cases, milli seconds will be enough. However, IHMO we should not truncate time to save space.

Author: > a nanosecond is smaller than a microsecond.

> 1 microsecond (µs) = 1000 nanoseconds (ns)

Author: > A long cannot represent a nanosecond.

Extension specifications MAY define secondary mapping rules for the values of
attributes they define, but MUST also include the previously defined primary
mapping.

> 

Reviewer 3: We appear to be missing 2.2...

Author: this ALWAYS happens with numbered heading is Markdown, annoying, would not number headings myself, fixing

### 2.3 OPTIONAL Attributes

> CloudEvents Spec defines OPTIONAL attributes. The Avro format defines that these

Reviewer 3: Would someone who understands Avro know what this means? I don't understand this at all. That may be fine though...

Reviewer 3: And does this need to say "The Avro Turbo format"? (It's probably worth checking for "Avro format" throughout the doc.)

Author: I think this section is not need, this is just how Avro works.

fields MUST use the `null` type and the actual type through the
[union][avro-unions].

Example:

```json
["null", "string"]
```

> 

Reviewer 3: What about extension attributes?

### 2.4 Definition

Users of Avro MUST use a message whose binary encoding is identical to the one
described by the [CloudEvent Avro Turbo Schema](cloudevents-turbo.avsc):

> ```json

Reviewer 3: Do we need to inline the file? That feels fragile to me in terms of the two schemas getting out of sync.

Author: I'm not a fan of this, I already make mistakes

Author: prior-art

{
  "namespace": "io.cloudevents.v1.avro",
  "type": "record",
  "name": "CloudEvent",
  "version": "1.0",
  "doc": "Avro Turbo Event Format for CloudEvents",
  "fields": [
    {
      "name": "id",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "source",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "type",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "datacontenttype",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "dataschema",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "subject",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "time",
      "type": [
        "null",
        {
          "type": "long",
          "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
        }
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {

>       "name": "attribute",

Reviewer 3: I assume this is provided for extension attributes. Does this mean we can't differentiate between string, URI and URI-ref attributes? This was unfortunate in JSON (and, I suspect, in the original Avro format) - if there's a way of including the type unambiguously when an extension attribute is specified, that would be great.

Author: looking...

Author: URI not supported

Author: https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.8.1/spec.html#Logical+Types

      "type": {
        "type": "map",
        "values": [
          "null",
          "boolean",
          "int",
          {
            "type": "long",
            "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
          },
          "string",
          "bytes"
        ]
      },
      "default": {}
    },
    {
      "name": "data",
      "type": [
        "bytes",
        "null"
      ],
      "default": "null"
    }
  ]
}
```

## 3 Data

> Before encoding, the AVRO serializer MUST first determine the runtime data type

Reviewer: If @JemDay is correct, perhaps just say that the content MUST be serialized as a series of bytes ??
I could see an argument for removing the entire section, but "data" is kind of special so it might be nice to call it out.

> Before encoding, the AVRO serializer MUST first determine the runtime data type

Reviewer 3: It looks like this is basically the first half of the equivalent section in the original Avro format.
Both documents probably need more work when we've reached some conclusions on #1204.

(I don't think we can remove the entire section - we've got to say *something* about data. It would be reasonable to say that the payload should be stored in the data field in the same way that it would be encoded to bytes in binary mode, perhaps.)

> Before encoding, the AVRO serializer MUST first determine the runtime data type

Author: deleting

of the content. This can be determined by examining the data for invalid UTF-8
sequences or by consulting the `datacontenttype` attribute.

## 4 Transport

Transports that support content identification MUST use the following designation:

```text

>  application/cloudevents+avro-turbo

Reviewer 2: I"m assuming we need to do this because avro doesn't (as far as I can tell) encode the namespace into the serialized representation ?

There may be some pushback on using a non-registered suffix, but given I don't think application/cloudevents is registered either it may not be an issue ...

Reviewer 3: I can't find details in RFC 2046 about what the use of "+" is intended to mean in a subtype...

Author: I'm assuming this is not an issue, because it is widely used in CE.

```

## 5 Examples

> The following table shows exemplary mappings:

Reviewer 3: Having one table with multiple examples in is a bit confusing IMO. It gives the impression that you can include data twice, for example.

Author: fixing

| CloudEvents | Type   | Exemplary Avro Value                           |
| ----------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------------- |
| type        | string | `"com.example.someevent"`                      |

> | specversion | N/A    | Spec version is always `1.0`.                  |

Reviewer 3: If this isn't specified anywhere at all within the body, should it be in the content type, e.g. `application/cloudevents+avro-turbo-1.0`? If not, what do we expect a CE-2.0 version of this format to look like?

| source      | string | `"/mycontext"`                                 |
| id          | string | `"7a0dc520-c870-4193c8"`                       |

> | time        | long   | `1234`                                         |

Reviewer 3: An example value in the 21st century with the RFC3339 equivalent would probably be useful here.

Author: fixing

| dataschema  | string | `"http://registry.com/schema/v1/much.json"`    |

> | contenttype | string | `"application/json"`                           |

Author: Copy and paste!

> | contenttype | string | `"application/json"`                           |

Author: fixing

> | data        | bytes  | `"{"much":{"wow":"json"}}"`                    |

Reviewer 3: I suspect the use of a string here could cause confusion, particularly with JSON inside it. Possibly just say "Arbitrary bytes"?

Author: I've unwrapped the string, but yes

| dataschema  | string | `"http://registry.com/subjects/ce/versions/1"` |

> | contenttype | string | `"application/avro"`                           |

Author: fixing

```json
{
  "namespace": "io.cloudevents.v1.avro",
  "type": "record",
  "name": "CloudEvent",
  "version": "1.0",
  "doc": "Avro Event Format for CloudEvents",
  "fields": [
    {
      "name": "id",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "source",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "type",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "datacontenttype",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "dataschema",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "subject",
      "type": [
        "null",
        "string"
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "time",
      "type": [
        "null",
        {
            "type": "long",
            "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
        }
      ],
      "default": null
    },
    {
      "name": "attribute",
      "type": {
        "type": "map",
        "values": [
          "null",
          "boolean",
          "int",
          "string",
          "bytes"
        ]
      },

>         "default": {}

Reviewer: think the spacing is off here, needs to go left 2 spaces
